dark ever hungry monsters live
all across the universe they're born
when massive stars blast into space
black holes as heavy as earth are just
as large as a ping-pong ball
they don't have a surface but their
gravity is so strong
even light can't escape it black holes
don't have physical boundaries like a
membrane either
the event horizon which is closest to a
typical boundary
is a threshold which after passing you
can't get out
for a star running into a black hole
normally ends in a spectacular light
show
and its destruction just one star that
astronomers know
of managed to survive an encounter with
a black hole
as heavy as 400 000 suns
it happened in a galaxy about 250
million light years away from earth
astronomers with really powerful
equipment notice
bursts of x-rays that raged in space
every nine hours
they thought they must be mayday signals
from a star
trapped by a cosmic abyss
the star was an average red giant when
it met its new friend for the first time
when they got too close to each other
the hungry space monster
couldn't resist the temptation and
snacked on its guest
when it was done with the star's outer
hydrogen layers
all that was left with the star's core
eventually the poor thing turned into a
white dwarf
but for some reason the giant space
monster couldn't finish the meal
and trapped it in its orbit for later
instead
ever since the now white dwarf has been
traveling in nine
hour laps it stays far enough from the
hole so it won't fall in or get
swallowed
its journey isn't going super smoothly
because of gravity
the orbital path is constantly rotating
after two days
it resembles a spirograph pattern
as the black hole keeps snacking on it
the star keeps losing its mass and
growing in
size its own orbit is becoming more and
more circular
scientists believe one day it will be
able to spiral away from its mean
friend and turn into a planet the size
of jupiter in a trillion years
that's 70 times longer than the universe
has existed so far
so it might not ever happen
the milky way alone has hundreds of
millions of black holes
and there are way more beyond it they
might feed on other stars and release
them in other galaxies
the telescopes that exist now might not
be strong enough to spot them
most galaxies including our milky way
have supermassive black holes at the
center
they can be billions of times heavier
than the sun
others of their kind are only three
times the mass of the sun
the nearest black hole to the earth was
spotted one
thousand light years away just around
the corner in galactic terms
it's in a star system you can see with
an unaided eye
scientists found it when they notice a
star behaving weirdly
it was a giant rotating like crazy they
guessed it must have a powerful
gravitational companion
the hungriest black hole astronomers
have spotted so far
weighs as much as 34 billion suns
and is about six times bigger than the
one at the center of the milky way
it eats the equivalent of one sun every
day
sometimes black holes even devour others
of their kind
that happen to be too close to them
before you get on a spaceship to escape
to some safe
no black hole galaxy here's some good
news
even though they're super massive they
don't have a radius
large enough to destroy earth and even
the hungriest of them are
safe to watch from a distance
no black hole should come closer to our
planet than the sun
for as long as the universe has existed
multiplied by 10 billion times
in the unlikely case one of these scary
things
passes by neptune it could affect the
earth's orbit
that would be no good
in theory anything can turn into a black
hole
the only difference between it and the
sun is the material their centers are
made of
it's incredibly dense in those huge
space monsters
in reality there's just one known way to
make a black hole
it has to be the gravitational collapse
of a super massive star
20 to 30 times the mass of the sun
so the sun will never ever become a
black hole
if it happened though and the former
star retained its mass
it would still have the same
gravitational power
earth would still keep going around it
and wouldn't get pulled in
its orbit would also remain as it is
the only huge problem would be the lack
of sunlight
in reality the sun isn't massive enough
for such a transformation
and will eventually become a white dwarf
a black hole won't ever eat an entire
galaxy for lunch
there are about 400 billion stars inside
the milky way
just around 0.1 percent of all the stars
that will ever form
will end up becoming black holes
the ever hungry supermassive monster
located right in the middle of a galaxy
has an impressive gravitational reach
but even that
wouldn't be enough it has already eaten
most of the stars that were close to it
it already weighs like a few million
suns
so it can't grow much larger even if it
keeps snacking on sun-like stars
galaxies will keep bumping into each
other and black holes will keep growing
and merging
but because the universe is already huge
and keeps expanding
these collisions and mergers won't go on
forever
black holes will travel this huge space
like rogue stars
they won't even be able to eat the dark
matter on the outskirts of galaxies
eventually all the black holes will
perish
but that would be a long long time from
now
if you ever become a space explorer and
travel far enough to meet a black hole
and fall into one your life won't
instantly
end instead things will be way more
complicated
the way you perceive space and time will
change
and your reality will split in two in
one of them
you'd cease existing in the other you'd
live and enter the hole
unharmed when you go deeper inside the
hole
you'll notice space becoming curvier and
curvier
at the center of the hole it's
infinitely curved
it's called singularity laws of physics
based on the ideas of space and time
don't have power here in a large enough
hole
millions of times more massive than the
sun things would go perfectly smoothly
for you
and you just keep free falling feeling
no gravity
you can just keep falling and falling in
total emptiness
until you reach singularity you'd have
no chance to move in the opposite
direction
in there space and time switch rolls
time is constantly pulling you forward
on earth but figuratively
and it would be doing that quite
physically inside the hole
in a smaller hole the force of gravity
would be stronger at your feet than your
head
that's why you would go through
spaghettification
this is how scientists call the process
when you compress horizontally and
stretch vertically like spaghetti
because of
crazy gravity of the black hole
speaking of spaghetti how are black
holes like an italian dinner
because once you go pasta the event
horizon
you get spaghettified and since you're
all by yourself
you'd be feeling cannilony right now
wow now i'm hungry meanwhile if you had
a fellow space traveler who for
some reason didn't end up in the black
hole it would look all different to them
they'd see you stretch and grow like
through a huge
magnifying glass the closer you get to
the edge of the hole
the more it would seem like you're
moving in slow motion
then you'd freeze and the flames would
surround you
you'd be in two places at the same time
living
different destinies but there would
still be just one copy of you
this is how black holes teach us nothing
is real
reality can be different to different
people
sometimes it's believed that we're all
living inside a huge black hole
everything in the universe started with
the big bang
but there's a theory saying there was
also something before that
it was a super dense seed that had all
the mass and energy of the universe
concentrated in it
about as heavy as a billion suns it was
a trillion times
smaller than any particle humans can
observe
the seed could be born inside a black
hole
if you believe there's more than one
universe
black holes could also serve as doors
between those universes
it could be like a root that two trees
share
you can't see a black hole directly
because it doesn't give off any light
scientists used to be able to only spot
them by what they were doing to their
surroundings when over 200 scientists
around the world
worked together they managed to take the
first pictures of that space oddity
the equipment they used added together
would be the power of a telescope the
size of earth